# Modeling Morphology Implementation
This repository contains the code for the computational implementation BN task for the Modeling morphology class with Dr. Ingo Plag (WiSe 2022/23). 

The class assignment was to implement either an analogical model or a discriminative model. I decided to do a discriminative model that would learn the associations of a small number of phonesthemes.  
The phonesthemes were selected from a list that was used in a previous corpus study on phonesthemes by [Otis et al (2008)](https://escholarship.org/content/qt0s67w5zj/qt0s67w5zj.pdf) and the words to create the corpus were taken from [Shisler B.K.'s Dictionary of Phonesthemes (2009)](https://www.oocities.org/soho/studios/9783/phond1.html).
A total of 150 words were selected from the website and preprocessed according to [pyndl's tutorial](https://pyndl.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) in order to use the model.
I trained a discriminative model with the `pyndl` package to see whether the model would be able to associate the phonesthematic meanings repective diphone in the word that represented the meaning.  
Concretely, this means that in the weight matrix, I would hope to see that the diphone 'bl' was strongly associated with "bubbly sounds". 

## File structure
The `Scripts` folder contains the Jupyter notebook that has the entire implementation including the preprocessing and the model training.
The `data` folder contains the corpus files and the weight and activation matrices that were generated by the model.

### `Phonestheme.ipynb`  
The notebook that contains the script to preprocess a csv file into a single column of cue words to create a cue file. There are comments in Markdown to note the flow of the work, notably at the end there are two interpretations of the weight and activation matrices.

### `ListOfPhonaesthemes.txt` and `Corpus.txt`
The first file contains 46 Phonesthemes that have been attested for in English. Initially, I was going to do all of them, but after the fourth line I decided I would have to webscrape the information from the website to do that faster, so I only selected the first four phonesthemes in the file. The meaning of the phonesthemes were taken from the  
Corpus.txt contains the respective words in one single column. The words in this file were originally in one long chain and all comma seperated, with the preprocess section in the notebook transposing them into one column.

### `levent.tab.gz`
The event file created by pyndl. The values are in the format of 
```
#b_w#_ow_bl_lo  blow	
#b_es_ze_s#_la_bl_az  blazes	
is_#b_li_er_te_s#_bl_rs_st  blisters	
```
### `event_separate.tsv` and `event_separate.gz`
This file is originally a version of levent.tab.gz where the outcome column was merged with the cues and the phonestheme meaning manually added as the outcome instead. event_separate.gz is the same file in gz format for pyndl to work with.
```
#b_w#_ow_bl_lo_blow	BubbleSound
#b_es_ze_s#_la_bl_az_blazes	BubbleSound
is_#b_li_er_te_s#_bl_rs_st_blisters	BubbleSound
```
### `Output.nc`
The weight matrix.

### `activation_matrix.tsv`
The activation matrix.

### `ModelingMorphology.pdf`
The class report that contains the procedure in a little bit more detailed. It sure makes sense of the table structures and has screenshots of the dataframes.

## Author
[**Anh Kim Nguyen**](https://slam.phil.hhu.de/authors/anh/)
